[draft] Overhaul of Trento Web documentation (#263)
trento-project/docs: trento/adoc/trento-web-console.adoc

Hosts::
Review all hosts that run the {tragent}, including, for example, their tuning status, available software updates or check results.

Clusters::
Review all discovered {pace} clusters, their configuration and their node states.

{sap} Systems::
Review all discovered {sap} systems by system ID, including the status of each
instance.

{hana} Databases::
Review all discovered {hana} databases by system ID, including the status of each database instance.

Checks catalog::
Browse the configuration checks that {trento} can run, by target type (hosts or clusters), cluster type (HANA scale up, HANA scale out or ASCS/ERS) and supported platform (Azure, AWS, GCP, Nutanix, on-premises/KVM or VMware).

Activity Log::
Review system events and user actions, with the timestamp, message, user, and severity of each entry.

Settings::
Modify user-defined settings, including API keys, the SUSE Multi-Linux Manager connection, Activity Log retention, and email alerts.

About::
View the {trserver} component versions, a link to the {tr_web} GitHub repository, and the number of discovered {sles4sap}{nbsp}subscriptions.

[[sec-about-trento-health]]

> === Understanding health status in {trento}

Reviewer: I suggest not to use the word "status" here because "status" in Trento refers to the value returned by sapcontrol for one specific SAP or HANA instance.

```suggestion
=== Understanding aggregated health in {trento}
```

Every host, cluster, {hana} database and {sap} system in {tr_web} displays one health icon, which represents its aggregated health value. This value is the combination of several factors that {trento} discovers separately.

To know why a component requires your attention, you need to know which factors contribute to its health. The following sections explain the health status icons, factors for each component, and the rule that combines the factors into a single status.

[[sec-trento-health-status-icons]]

> ==== Health status icons in {tr_web} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
==== Aggregated health icons in {tr_web} 
```

Every health icon in {tr_web} console shows one of the following states.

> .Health status in {tr_web} console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Aggregated health in {tr_web} console
```

[options="header"]
|===
|Status |Icon color |Meaning

|passing
|Green
|No action needed. 

|warning
|Yellow
|Needs attention, but not urgently. 

|critical
|Red
|Needs immediate attention.

|stopped/unknown
|Gray
|A contributing component is not running, or {trento} cannot determine its value. For example, when the connection to SUSE Multi-Linux Manager fails.

|stale
|Any of the previous colors, with a clock overlay
|The value shown in the console is the last one received. The responsible {tragent} has stopped
reporting. For more information, see <<sec-trento-stale-data>>.
|===

[NOTE]
====
A dash `—` in the dashboard means that no {pace} cluster manages the corresponding
layer of that {sap} system. It is not a health state and it needs no action.
====

//TO DO: Add a screenshot

[[sec-trento-health-calculation]]

> ==== How {trento} calculates health state

Reviewer: "state" is another word I would avoid using in the context of health because in Trento it refers to the cluster current activity as returned by crmadmin.
```suggestion
==== How {trento} calculates aggregated health
```

{trento} evaluates each factor separately, then reduces the results to one aggregated

> value and reflects that value in the health status in the {tr_web} console. The factors are combined as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
value and reflects that value in the corresponding aggregated health icon in the {tr_web} console. The factors are combined as follows:
```

passing::
All factors passing

warning::
At least one warning, all others passing

critical::
At least one critical, all others warning or passing

stopped or unknown::
At least one stopped or unknown, where applicable

Depending on the component, the aggregated health is calculated as a compound of different factors:

.Health factors per component
[options="header"]
[#tab-trento-component-health-factors]
|===
|Component |Contributing factors

|Hosts
|`{saptune}` tuning status, available software updates, check results

|{hana} clusters

> |{hana} secondary sync state, check results

Reviewer: Since this PR affects Trento 3.2 we need to include the health of the SBD devices as an additional factor:

```suggestion
|{hana} secondary sync state, check results, health of SBD devices
```

|ASCS/ERS clusters

> |ASCS/ERS distribution status, check results

Reviewer: Since this PR affects Trento 3.2 we need to include the health of the SBD devices as an additional factor:

```suggestion
|ASCS/ERS distribution status, check results, health of SBD devices
```

the *Settings* menu. For more information, see <<sec-integration-with-SUSE-Manager>>.
+
[options="header"]
|===
|Condition |Status

|The connection fails, the host is not found, or the data cannot be retrieved
|unknown

|No software updates are available
|passing

|Updates are available, none of them security related
|warning

|At least one available update is security related
|critical
|===

Check results::
Contributes only when checks are selected to run on the target.
+
[options="header"]
|===
|Condition |Status

|All checks passing
|passing

|At least one check warning, all others passing
|warning

|At least one check critical, all others warning or passing
|critical
|===

{hana} secondary sync state::
Applies to {hana} clusters only.
+
[options="header"]
|===
|Condition |Status

|`SOK`, meaning the secondary site is in sync
|passing

|`SFAIL`, meaning replication has failed
|critical
|===

ASCS/ERS distribution status::
Applies to ASCS/ERS clusters only.
+
[options="header"]
|===
|Condition |Status

|ASCS and ERS instances run on different hosts
|passing

|Both run on the same host
|critical
|===

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Health of SBD devices::
Applies to clusters using file-based SDB fencing.
[options="header"]
|===
|Condition |Status

|All devices healthy
|passing

|At least one device not healthy
|critical
|===
```

Instance status::
`sapcontrol` reports a status for each {hana} database instance and each {sap} application instance, which {tr_web} shows as a color.
+
[options="header"]
|===
|Condition |Status

> |All green

Reviewer: `sapcontrol` returns the status in uppercase:

```suggestion
|All GREEN
```

|passing

> |At least one yellow, all others green

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|At least one YELLOW, all others GREEN
```

|warning

> |At least one red, all others green or yellow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|At least one RED, all others GREEN or YELLOW
```

|critical

> |At least one gray

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|At least one GRAY
```

> |stopped or unknown

Reviewer: In this case `GRAY` means stopped

```suggestion
|stopped
```

|===

[[sec-trento-health-dashboard]]
==== Aggregated health in the dashboard

The dashboard is the main page of {tr_web}, and you can always return to it by clicking
*Dashboard* in the left sidebar. It presents the health of each {sap} system across
the layers of the {sap} architecture, and groups the systems in three health boxes:

Passing::
  Systems whose layers all report passing.
Warning::

>   Systems with at least one layer in warning state and all remaining layers passing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Systems with at least one layer with warning health and all remaining layers passing.
```

Critical::

>   Systems with at least one layer in critical state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Systems with at least one layer with critical health.
```

> .Dashboard with the global health state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Dashboard with the global health
```

[#fig-trento-web-home]
image::trento-web-home.png[{trento} dashboard showing the Passing, Warning and Critical health boxes above the list of SAP systems,scaledwidth=80.0%]

The boxes are clickable. Clicking a box filters the dashboard by systems in that health

> state, which is the fastest way to isolate the affected systems in a large landscape.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The boxes are clickable. Clicking a box filters the dashboard by systems with that aggregated health, which is the fastest way to isolate the affected systems in a large landscape.
```

Two dashboard columns carry aggregated values of their own:

* The *Application instances* value combines the status of the individual {sap}
instances of the system.
* The *Hosts* value combines the aggregated health of all hosts that belong to the
system and to its database.

For more information on how the aggregated health is calculated for those columns, see <<sec-trento-health-calculation>>.

[[sec-trento-stale-data]]
=== Identifying stale data

A {tragent} is continuously sending up-to-date data to {tr_web}. When an agent stops reporting, for example due to a connectivity issue, service crash, or host crash, {tr_web} keeps displaying the last data it received from that
agent.

> Data that is no longer refreshed is marked as _stale_. A stale value was correct when it was last received, but it does not reflect the current state of the component. Therefore, the stale value should be treated as unverified until the agent reports again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data that is no longer refreshed is marked as _stale_. A stale value was correct when it was last received, but it might not reflect the current state of the component. Therefore, the stale value should be treated as unverified until the agent reports again.
```

{tr_web} marks stale data in the following ways:

* *Stale icon.* The regular status or health icon is shown with a clock overlay.
* *Tooltip.* When you hover over a stale icon, it displays the date and time the value became stale.
* *Warning banner.* The _Details_ views of affected hosts, clusters, {hana} databases and
{sap} systems display a warning banner.

> * *Grayed-out rows.* In relevant views, the row of the affected host, instance or node is grayed out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Grayed-out rows.* In relevant views, the row of the affected host, cluster, database, system or instance is grayed out.
```

> * *Activity log entry.* {trento} creates an entry with severity `info` when a value becomes stale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Activity log entry.* {trento} creates an entry with severity `debug` when a value becomes stale.
```

// .Stale status icon with tooltip
// [#fig-trento-stale-icon]
// image::PLACEHOLDER-trento-stale-icon.png[Health icon with a clock overlay and a tooltip showing the time since the value became stale,scaledwidth=50.0%]

> .How stale status affects each component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.How stale data affects each component
```

[options="header"]
|===
|Component |When it becomes stale |Where you see it

|Host
|The agent of the host stops reporting

> |Stale icon in the relevant views, warning banner in the _Host Details_ view, grayed-out row

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Stale icon in the relevant views, grayed-out row in the Hosts overview, warning banner in the _Host Details_ view
```

|Cluster
|The agent of one of the cluster hosts stops reporting

> |Stale icon in the relevant views and in the dashboard, warning banner in the _Cluster Details_ view, grayed-out node rows in the _Cluster Details_ view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Stale icon in the relevant views and in the dashboard, grayed-out row in the Clusters oveview, warning banner in the _Cluster Details_ view 
```

|{hana} database instance
|The agent of the host that runs the instance stops reporting

> |Stale status icon in the relevant views, grayed-out row

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Stale status icon and grayed-out rows in the relevant views
```

|{sap} instance
|The agent of the host that runs the instance stops reporting

> |Stale status icon in the relevant views, grayed-out row

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Stale status icon and grayed-out row in the relevant views
```

|{hana} database
|The status of any of its instances becomes stale

> |Stale icon in the relevant views and in the dashboard, warning banner in the _{hana} Database Details_ view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Stale icon in the relevant views and in the dashboard, grayed-out row in the Databases overview, warning banner in the _{hana} Database Details_ view
```

|{sap} system
|The status of any of its instances becomes stale, including database instances

> |Stale icon in the relevant views, warning banner in the _{sap} System Details_ view

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Stale icon in the relevant views, grayed-out row in the SAP systems overview, warning banner in the _{sap} System Details_ view
```

|Application instances in the dashboard
|The status of any application instance of the {sap} system becomes stale
|Stale icon in the dashboard

|Hosts in the dashboard

> |The status of any host of the {sap} system or of its database becomes stale

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|The aggregated health of any host of the {sap} system or of its database becomes stale
```

|Stale icon in the dashboard
|===

When you find a stale value, verify the reporting path before you investigate the component itself: check if the host is reachable and running, and whether the {tragent} service is running on it.

Once the agent reports again, {tr_web} replaces the stale value with the current one and removes the clock marker.

[[sec-trento-finding-health-issue]]
=== Finding the cause of a health issue

> An aggregated health value indicates when something needs attention. To find out what, follow the aggregation from the dashboard to the factor that caused the state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A not-passing aggregated health value indicates that something needs attention. To find out what, follow the aggregation from the dashboard to the factor that caused the state.
```

> . In the {tr_web} console *Dashboard*, click the health box that matches the state you want to investigate, for example *Critical*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the {tr_web} console *Dashboard*, click the health box that matches the value you want to investigate, for example *Critical*.
```

> The dashboard now lists only the systems in that state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dashboard now lists only the systems with matching health value.
```

> . Identify the layer that carries the state and select the desired view. Each layer icon links to the view that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Identify the layer that carries the value and select the desired view. Each layer icon links to the view that
```

holds the underlying data:

** The *application instances* health icon opens the {sap} System Detail view.
** The *application cluster* health icon opens the ASCS/ERS Cluster Details view.
** The *database* health icon opens the {hana} Database Details view.
** The *database cluster* health icon opens the {hana} Cluster Details view.
** The *hosts* health icon opens the Hosts overview, filtered by SID equal to the SAPSID and the DBSID of the corresponding SAP system.

. Check whether a stale banner is displayed. If it is, investigate the reporting problem first. For more information, see <<sec-trento-stale-data>>.

> . Identify the factor that caused the state and investigate, using the information in <<sec-trento-health-calculation>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Identify the factor that caused the value and investigate, using the information in <<sec-trento-health-calculation>>.
```

// mention the tooltip or tell the reader how else to tell them apart.

Why does a status icon show a clock?::
The clock marks a _stale_ value. This happens when the responsible {tragent} stops reporting. The console shows the last known state. Hover over the icon to see exactly when the value became stale. For more information on how to investigate stale data, see <<sec-trento-stale-data>>.

Why does the dashboard show a dash (`—`) instead of a cluster health state?::
The dash means that no {pace} cluster manages that layer of the {sap} system. The dash is not an error and requires no action.

The status of a host or cluster is warning or critical, but all checks pass. Where does the status come from?::
Check results are only one of the factors {trento} evaluates. Investigate the other contributing factors. For more information, see <<sec-trento-finding-health-issue>>.

An {sap} system is critical, but all its instances are green. Why?::
The aggregated health of the {hana} database contributes to the health of the {sap} system. Investigate the _{hana} Database Details_ view to find the root cause.

Why is the host showing a warning for `{saptune}`?::

> This happens if `{saptune}` is not installed, the installed version is older than 3.1, no tuning solution is applied to the host, or tuning status is not compliant. Run `saptune note verify` in the host for further details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This happens if `{saptune}` is not installed, the installed version is older than 3.1, no tuning solution is applied to the host, or tuning status is not compliant. In this last case, run `saptune note verify` in the host for further details.
```

The Activity Log is becoming cluttered with old events. Can old events be cleared automatically?::
{tr_web} allows you to configure automatic retention limits to manage storage consumption and reduce clutter. For steps on how to do this, see <<sec-activity-log>>.

> What is the fastest way to investigate critical email alerts, such as "Host heartbeat failed" or "Cluster health detected critical"?::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What is the fastest way to investigate email alerts, such as "Host stopped reporting" or "Cluster needs attention"?::
```

> These alerts are triggered by {trento}'s event-driven architecture when a _critical_ status is detected. For the fastest way to investigate, see <<sec-trento-finding-health-issue>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These alerts are triggered by {trento}'s event-driven architecture when a stale or _critical_ value is detected. For the fastest way to investigate, see <<sec-trento-finding-health-issue>>.
```

How are pending software updates applied for hosts shown in {trento}?::

> While {tr_web} shows when updates are missing and flags the state as a _warning_ or _critical_, the actual patching is managed by SUSE Multi-Linux Manager. Log into your SUSE Multi-Linux Manager interface to view and apply the specific packages for that host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While {tr_web} shows when updates are missing and flags the health as a _warning_ or _critical_, the actual patching is managed by SUSE Multi-Linux Manager. Log into your SUSE Multi-Linux Manager interface to view and apply the specific packages for that host.
```

> Which data should be collected before reporting an issue?::

Reviewer: I want to make clear that that customers can report issues with Trento itself but not issues with hosts/clusters/databases/systems registered with Trento.
```suggestion
Which data should be collected before reporting an issue with Trento itself?::
```

* Connection data for SUSE Multi-Linux Manager. See <<sec-integration-with-SUSE-Manager>>.
* Retention time for Activity Log entries. See <<sec-activity-log>>.
* Settings required for sending alerts via email.

If any of the email settings are specified through environment variables, the
web-based email configuration is disabled. For more information, see
<<sec-trento-enabling-email-alerts>>.

[[sec-trento-webconsole-troubleshooting]]
=== Troubleshooting

When monitoring your {sap} landscape in the {tr_web} console, you might encounter unfamiliar health icons, unexpected system values, or sudden alerts. The following frequently asked questions address common scenarios and provide immediate starting points for your investigation.

Why is a health icon gray?::
A gray icon means either _stopped_ or _unknown_ health. Stopped means the component exists but is not running, as reported by `sapcontrol`. Unknown means {trento} cannot determine the value, most often because the connection to SUSE Multi-Linux Manager fails, the host is not found, or the data cannot be retrieved.

// TODO: The draft said a tooltip distinguishes the two. Verify against the running product, then either

> // mention the tooltip or tell the reader how else to tell them apart.

Author: note: it seems to be distinguished by type instead of tooltip, check if that is going to change

Author: I will keep the TODO note and add the information later after the work is finalised.
